Real Time Example:

Read the Question:

"Should the US pursue legal action against Wal-Mart over allegations of bribery in Mexico?"

[extemp central screenshot]

First I do general search to get some background on the topic. 

[seattle pi article]

Now I understand the gist of the issue: Wal-Mart bribed mexican officials to speed up getting building permits, and arrangements that violate mexican law. (like building a walmart in a historical area).

The decision making framework I'll use for determining whether the US should or should not do something in general is utilitarianism: "Does it benefit the most people for the lowest cost to society?". If yes, then I'll argue the US should do it. 

Important point:
"US law forbids american companies from bribing foreign officials" - Seattle PI Jan. 10 2013

Wal-Mart failed to mention officially sanctioning bribes. Lawmakers unveiled emails revealing that they lied about denying knowledge of bribes.

[us news article]

In order to improve their public image, wal mart started a campaign claiming it could hire many veterans. This is easy to believe, a point for pro.

However, the same article notes they have been turning a blind eye to illicet international activity.

[cs monitor article ]

Other sources agree that wal mart can create many jobs for veterans

Michelle Obama supports their initiative (as part of a government program to support hiring of veterans)

[the economic times]

Wal Mart is spending money in mexico to expand. One fifth of all wal-marts are in mexico. Mexico seems to be abnormally corrupt anyway, despite wal mart.

If the violations are proven, wal-mart would pay 4.5 to 9 billion dollars. The largest ever for this kind of charge. The previous record was 1 billion by siemons.

[Chicago tribune]

As the US's largest gun seller, the US government tried to get Wal-Mart in on their gun control talks. 


-----

Based on this research so far I'll make the following argument.

"Should the US pursue legal action against Wal-Mart over allegations of bribery in Mexico?" No; because:
1. While it's techincally illegal, bribes are commonplace in Mexico. The US should not spend time going after Wal-Mart specifically.
2. Wal-Mart is a major source of jobs in the US and Mexico, government action would cetrainly reduce their hiring. 
3. Wal-Mart has political capital to spend on the issue of gun control, and the US government should try to curry their favor. 


So far for each point I have the following sources:

1. Bribes are commonplace. Wal-Mart is not the inherent problem.
a. 