Tutorial v1

Download articles before hand. You only need to do this once before the competition, but daily or weekly updates will download faster than everything at once.

[0 downloading articles]

Lets try a practice question from Extemp Central.

"Will the Biden proposal bring about a meaningful change in US gun control policy?"

[1 extempcentral screenshot]

Start by reading about the subject of the question. Your prior knowledge should guide your search. ExtempEngine can help fill in the details.

[2 searching the subject]

You can open articles to read later in a new tab by clicking the middle mouse button, or control+clicking (command-click on mac)

[3 cnn article]

This article looks like a good summary. It outlines three things that describe the intent of Joe Biden's proposal:

- universal background checks
- assault weapons ban
- high-capacity magazine ban

You should read more articles to explain the details. Our first main point to answer the question could be to describe in detail what his proposal is. Alternatly, we could provide a less detailed summary in our introduction. 

Personally, I would organize a speech on the topic as the following:

0. Introduction describing the proposal, and why it ever happened in the first place

In the meat of the speech I would answer the following questions:

1. Are the changes proposed historically significant? Were the same kind of changes ever proposed before? Did they pass? Why or why not?

2. How likely are the changes to pass in a meaningful form today? Often politions propose dramatic laws that they know they will have to compromize on. How much did either side of the proposal compromize already? How much will they in the future?

3. If the changes pass in whatever form, what kind of impact are they predicted to have? Is this impact actually meaningful? Will it support the greater intent of the proposal?

5. Conclusion. Short.

An important note here is that Biden's proposal is functionally Obama's proposal, as they are both behind the legislation.

In order for the legislation to impart 'meaningful' change you need to understand how much of it will likely be removed, watered down, or compromised. To do that, read more about the opposing side.

In this case, the important groups are the National Rifle Association (NRA), and other gun rights, or 2nd ammendment rights groups.

Start by reading about how each component of the proposal is likely to pass in congress. 


[4.1 nbc news ]

Search 'assualt weapons ban'

An older ban expired in 2004, and Califronia and New York both have bans. Many of the laws surrounding them are easy to circumvent. Assault weapons are used only in a small minority of violent crimes, so the impact of banning them on violent crime on a whole is questionable. (Most are desginated by having a number of 'military-style freatures').

[4 us news article]

It seems like an 'assault weapons ban' has low change of passing. Many sources seem to agree on this. The main argument centers on the idea that the term assault weapon does not really describe how effective a gun is at killing, and is otherwise vague.


[5 cs monitor article]

Search 'universal background checks'

Universal background checks already exist in some states, there's evidence for against whether they work at reducing violent crime. Currently, guns purchased at gun stores require a background check, the new law tries to enforce checks on the 40% of guns purchased at gun shows and from private individuals.

This seems like something with a better chance of passing. Sources tend to agree that there is far less debate on this part of the proposal. The main problem opponents have is they argue it's too vague.

[]